[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
So what does it mean
to have an open heart?
Do you make your decisions
more with your mind
or with your heart?
And then, how does the soul
play into that conversation?
Are the soul and
the heart connected?
These are some of
the questions that
were inspired by my
guest, Mark Nepo, who
is a poet, a philosopher,
and a cancer survivor.
And he has been
uncovering a path
of spiritual inquiry
for more than 40 years.
Welcome.
I'm so happy to have you here.
>>MARK NEPO: Well, thank you.
It's great to be with you.
Thanks for having me.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
So how do you begin a journey
of a spiritual inquiry?
How do you start on that path?
Do you wake up in
the morning and say,
I really want to go on a
deep dive into my soul?
>>NEPO: Well, I think that the
language we put to these things
is in retrospect.
Even as a child, I felt
connected to everything
around me.
So even as a child, I felt like
nature, even cities, people
that-- strange.
I just felt like things
were talking to me.
>>LISA: Did it make you
feel different as a child,
not-- did you feel like you
fit in as a child or no?
>>NEPO: Not completely.
But this is the thing, you
know, the great philosopher
Kierkegaard said we're
all spies for God.
Everyone has their innate
connection to life.
And actually, when we're
born as little infants,
the first thing-- we know
this oneness from the womb.
And there is no
subject or object.
There's no I, you, me, or mine.
>>LISA: Separation, yeah.
>>NEPO: But one of
the paradoxes of life
is that in order to
be here in the world,
to be a spirit in a
body in time on Earth,
we have to start learning
how to differentiate.
And now, oh, this is me.
Oh, that's you.
>>LISA: Right.
>>NEPO: And then we
start-- it starts
unfolding the life
of relationship.
But it's fascinating
that all along the way,
we're asked to keep that
connection of oneness
in our heart.
And everyone,
whatever tradition,
whoever you think of
as the sages or saints,
they all recover
that oneness where
they say-- Krishnamurti
said, there are no others.
There are no others.
It's just us.
>>LISA: It's
interesting, though.
Because we, as adolescents,
strive for that independence.
We need to push the parent away
and become our own individual.
That's what we need to do.
So it's very-- it's paradoxical.
>>NEPO: Oh, yeah, let's
talk-- and a lot, I think,
of what we'll talk
about is about paradox,
because paradox has just
been my greatest teacher.
So let's just offer that
paradox is any moment where
more than one thing is
true at the same time.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>NEPO: And the mind
can't solve paradox.
As great a gift as
it is, only the heart
in great love and
great suffering,
sometimes force us to open our
heart and take in what-- we go,
wait a minute.
That can't be true.
And we're asked to let it in our
heart so the logic of the heart
can show itself.
And we are jarred
into understandings
that we would probably avoid.
So we do need to individuate.
We do need to find
out, OK, who am I?
And then as life
goes on, we are asked
to find, how are we the
same now that I have a self?
And this is the
journey of compassion.
>>LISA: What you
said is so important,
and it just hit
through to my heart
about there are more
than one thing that
is true at the same time.
We are taught we are in an
either/or world, or this
or that world.
We are not in an
"and" conversation.
>>NEPO: It's always.
You know, one of the great
teachers for me in-- I'm 63,
but one of the great teachers
in the last 10 years for me
has been this paradox
that all things are true.
>>LISA: Wow.
Really?
>>NEPO: And I write about
that in the new book.
Not that all things are fair,
not that all things are just,
but all things contain truth.
And the heart, as we get-- as
we're here longer and longer,
the heart is asked to
absorb and integrate
the truth of all things.
Because from that
place, when I do
have to choose between this
and that in the outer world,
I'll make different decisions
if I know in my heart
that all things are true.
>>LISA: Well, how can
things like murder
be true and thievery be true?
>>NEPO: Well, so let's look at--
there are many levels of truth.
But just for our conversation
right now, let's look at there
is factual truth.
There is interpretative truth.
And there's
all-encompassing truth.
So the fact.
The fact is this is a
ch-- this is a table.
It's not a chair.
>>LISA: Right.
>>NEPO: Now, somebody
murders somebody or somebody
steals something from someone.
The fact that they stole
it is factually true.
Now we start say-- asking,
why did they do that?
And you, who know the
person, say, well,
they've got an addiction.
They've got a problem.
Or they're-- even better,
they don't have money to feed
their children and they're
stealing it to feed
their children.
And then I might say, but
that doesn't make it right.
And now we're in
interpretive truth.
We're trying to understand
why does this happen.
The fact that someone has done
something horrible or terrible
or stealing is true in
the fact that it happened.
And it's part of the
all-encompassing truth
of the universe.
And we need-- you know,
this leads us into--
and I learned this
through my cancer journey.
But later I learned that in the
Buddhist trad-- and by the way,
from my writing it's
probably obvious,
but I'm a student of all paths.
I was raised Jewish, but I am
a student of all paths trying--
I've spent all these years,
all my books, all my teaching
to try to understand
the common center
and to praise and make available
the unique gifts of each one.
>>LISA: So who is God to you?
>>NEPO: God?
God is the unnameable
unity that's
larger than any one of us
that imbues us with life force
and wants us only to be
as alive as possible.
>>LISA: Is it an energy
or is it a deity?
>>NEPO: Well, this is where we
start to get into naming that
and everybody goes
to their camp.
So for me, if you believe in
anything larger than yourself,
you're a mystic.
As soon as we start to try
to name that, is it a deity?
Is it nature?
Is it energy?
Is it quantum physics?
>>LISA: Then you
separate each other.
>>NEPO: Is it Allah?
Buddha?
Right.
And as I get older,
quite honestly,
I'm not interested in names.
Find your own synonyms.
What I'm interested
is in comparing notes
on how do we relate
to everything
that's larger than us?
Am I a fish in a stream?
Am I a star in the sky?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>NEPO: Am I a leaf on a tree?
Am I a rung on a ladder letting
someone climb to their greatest
potential?
>>LISA: I recently had this
really amazing epiphany
about the God-like energy.
And if you think about
the millions of years
that people-- well, I would say
that the millions of people--
I would say billions of
people that have ever
believed in a source
of the deity that
is a God-like source
or a God-like character
for thousands and thousands
and thousands of years.
And billions and
billions of people
have believed in this
collective idea, concept,
of a god or the god energy.
That, to me, is what God is.
It's that cumulative energy
moving forward through time
that you can tap into and draw
around you at any given time.
To me, it's a collective
energy of historical belief.
>>NEPO: So let me speak to that.
That's beautiful in
a couple of ways.
One is a personal example.
You talk about how indigenous
cultures and ancient cultures
would believe either in a
particular deity or several.
In the last year, I
lost my father at 93.
And my wife and I lost our
beloved yellow lab, Mira,
last February.
And I was driving this summer
in traffic, kind of stopped,
and it was one of
those contrasting days
where there were dark clouds
but amazing light coming
through them.
>>LISA: Oh, I love those days.
Yes.
>>NEPO: And I looked up.
And in this lighted
place, it looked
like there was a place up there.
You know, that's how graphic--
>>LISA: Interesting, yes.
>>NEPO: --the
light in the cloud.
It looked for a
minute like, wow,
that's a waterfall or something.
And I was feeling
the loss of them.
And I thought, you know, I can
understand how anyone feeling
loss and grief could
look into the sky one day
and believe there's
somebody living there.
>>LISA: What a
beautiful image that is.
>>NEPO: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>NEPO: But now, let's
look at this notion
of when we connect to
that collective source
that you were speaking of.
To me, that is where
resilience reveals itself.
So let me say what
I mean by that.
So we are each, as
human beings, I feel,
challenged to feel what is ours
to feel, not to drown in it
and not to deny it.
Because when we deny it,
we know it all gets bigger
and it doesn't go away.
And the life of
feelings-- we can
drown in one of our feelings.
And it can overwhelm us.
So this is one of the
challenges of being human.
Given this, when I
can feel what I'm
feeling to the bottom of
my personality, I touch in.
So for instance, when I can
feel the grief at losing
my father to the bottom of
what it means for me honestly,
I touch in to the
moment that everyone
who ever lost a father.
And when I'm in that company--
>>LISA: That's
what the bottom is.
>>NEPO: --I'm not alone.
>>LISA: That's true.
>>NEPO: Now, that's the
beginning of resilience.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
So that whole idea of
something is bigger than us,
and other people have
suffered other than us.
And to immerse yourself
in that collective energy
is kind of the same
as that God-like wave
that I was talking about.
>>NEPO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>NEPO: And it's not just
with difficult things.
So the moment that I am
experiencing a sunset
on the edge of the
sea and I'm feeling
the wonder of this vastness,
if I let myself truly feel it,
I am in the moment that
everyone was ever stunned--
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
Absolutely.
>>NEPO: --by the
beauty of the sky.
And when I'm in that company,
this is feeling eternity.
Not eternity as stacking
up years sequentially.
But eternity is when we
inhabit our aliveness enough--
and nobody can do it forever.
We come and go.
But when we are in that moment--
>>LISA: In that moment, yes.
>>NEPO: --then we are feeling
the oneness of eternity
around us and in us.
>>LISA: It seems to be the
answer to human suffering,
when we realize that we're
part of a bigger whole.
That it's not just us and
it's not a pity party,
but it is part of an
entire collective.
Either suffering or joy or
spirituality or vastness,
it really gets it
off of ourselves,
which is where the ego tends
to grapple with and get
onto-- this is just me.
This is my drama, my problem.
It takes it off of ourselves.
>>NEPO: So this raises
another wonderful paradox
that everyone has to face.
Everyone has to face.
So the one is-- side of it
is that as we individuate,
as we find that we're
here, and we're a self,
and we're excited
about being here,
and then we develop dreams
and goals and ambitions.
And there's nothing wrong
with striving for things
or working for things.
But what I have found in my own
life is that-- I know I have.
And I believe that we
hold on to those dreams
too tightly, as if
they are the end goal.
When I believe-- I've
come to understand
that dreams are
kindling to throw
on the fire of our aliveness.
>>LISA: They're not the
end-all fulfillment?
>>NEPO: No.
>>LISA: They add to the
fulfillment on the way there?
>>NEPO: So while our
dreams may not come true,
by working honestly toward
them, we may come true.
>>LISA: That is a
wonderful paradox.
>>NEPO: So the other--
Let me go a little further.
So that's all fine.
And then sooner or
later, it doesn't
matter how gifted you are, how
lucky, how loved or not loved,
how connected--
it doesn't matter.
Sooner or later--
how intelligent
you are-- everyone alive
will run into a moment
when they don't
get what they want.
>>LISA: Of course.
Many times.
I mean, a zillion times.
>>NEPO: It's not to minimize
or diminish what we want.
That's a whole process of
disappointment and loss.
But when we don't
get what we want,
it breaks our
self-reference, and we
are thrown into this
larger conversation.
OK, it's not just about me.
I am a part in a whole.
>>LISA: Back to resilience.
>>NEPO: Right.
>>LISA: Is this what "The
Book of Awakening" is about?
What we're talking about
here in terms of paradoxes
and surrendering and being in
that collective consciousness,
in that soup?
Is that how you
started with that book?
>>NEPO: Well, I think the
content is about how to awaken
and how to stay awake.
And it's been known for a
long time that those who wake
are the students, but those who
stay awake are the teachers.
>>LISA: Are the
teachers, interesting.
>>NEPO: And how we take turns.
>>LISA: A-ha.
Yes.
Is the same thing
as consciousness
to you, awakening?
>>NEPO: Yes.
I prefer the word awakening
instead of consciousness.
>>LISA: Why?
>>NEPO: Because I
think consciousness
tends to place it
too much in the mind.
And awakening involves
our whole being.
Our whole being and
every resource we have.
But, you know, but why I
started "The Book of Awakening,"
I was out of my
cancer experience.
>>LISA: Your cancer experience?
>>NEPO: Yes.
I am 27 years on the other
side of my cancer experience.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>NEPO: Which feels--
It's a blessing to be here.
It feels like a lifetime
ago and yesterday.
>>LISA: Yes.
Oh, at the same time?
>>NEPO: I often feel like I'm
8 and 80 at the same time.
>>LISA: I was watching--
Wow.
I was watching an interview
in "The Power of the Heart,"
the new movie that you're
in, about your experience
and how it was an
awakening for you.
Can you tell us a
little bit about that?
>>NEPO: Yeah.
Sure.
I was in my mid-30s
when I came down
with a rare form
of lymphoma that
appeared as a tumor
growing in my skull bone.
And it grew very large, to
like the size of a grapefruit.
>>LISA: Inside the bone?
>>NEPO: Inside the
bone, going out and in.
And that began a
three-year journey
during which that tumor
on my brain vanished.
It was a miracle.
And at the same
time, I had a tumor--
because this was so dramatic--
nobody, even me, didn't
notice-- growing on a rib in
my back from the same cancer.
And so after I somehow
was thrown back into life
with this miracle, within a
year this tumor on my back
was growing.
And I had to have
that rib removed.
And I had to go through
very aggressive chemo, which
almost killed me.
And I had to stop the chemo.
So I kind of was thrown
in, in my mid-30s.
I had just finished
getting my doctorate.
I was beginning to
teach at a university.
I didn't yet have
any books published.
I was trying to be
a part of this world
and try to help
change the world.
And then all of a sudden,
life started changing me.
>>LISA: Yes.
And you were a professor
of philosophy, right?
>>NEPO: Of poetry
and philosophy.
And so I was turned upside down,
and humbled, and broken open.
One of the things that I
learned through this journey
was-- I mean, I
mentioned earlier
about being a
student of all paths.
And it really comes from that
because during that journey,
I've always been what I would
consider an open person.
But I wasn't open until I
really was desperate to be here.
>>LISA: Oh, you had to choose?
>>NEPO: I had to
choose to be open.
So being Jewish, I had
people of every faith
offer some healing to me.
And I accepted everything.
I didn't debate about
whose god, whose tradition.
I had a Catholic priest
who was a friend,
and he wanted to
lay his hands on me.
We didn't have a conversation.
I said, where, when, and do
it as often as you'd like.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Yes.
I'll take it.
>>NEPO: And so waking up on
the other side, still here,
kind of like Jonah spit out
of the mouth of the whale,
I was not and am not wise enough
to know what worked and what
didn't.
And so I was asked--
by God, or whatever
you want to call it-- by
everything larger than me,
to start believing
in everything.
>>LISA: Is that what you came
out of that experience with?
Was that the decision
that you made?
>>NEPO: It was.
It was an awakening
that overcame me,
not a decision I made.
>>LISA: To believe
in everything.
>>NEPO: To believe
And the other
thing that happened
on the other side of
that is that I've always
believed in the
heart, in the soul,
in the unseeable mystery
of things that matter.
But before my cancer
journey, I have
to say that I was
more in my head.
>>LISA: A little bit
of an intellectual?
>>NEPO: Yeah.
I was more in my head.
And this-- again, I
didn't make any decision.
I'd like to say there was
some wisdom on my part.
No.
But I woke up and now
I was living from here.
And ever since then, my
mind has served my heart.
The mind is a
magnificent tool, but I
don't believe that
it should ever
be given the keys to the car.
>>LISA: So let's
talk about what you
said in terms of being
ruled by the heart.
>>NEPO: You know, the
proper role of the will
is not that we
create everything,
not that we
manipulate everything,
not that we control everything.
It's to allow us
from a felt placed
to participate in
the living universe.
And we are humbled
through great love
and suffering to
finally-- some of us
don't, but to finally
accept that fact.
>>LISA: The will tends
to run me, though.
I don't know about that.
Let's dive into that
a little bit deeper.
>>NEPO: So let's back up
for a minute, and let's talk
about what it means
to be wholehearted.
And wholehearted,
to me, means that we
are challenged to open
ourselves in all directions
and be as present as possible
without conclusion every day.
>>LISA: Every day.
>>NEPO: Every day.
Now being human,
who can do that?
Nobody.
I can't do that.
So just the way our eyes are
blinking while we're talking,
our lungs are expanding
and contracting
while we're talking, the
heart opens and closes,
our wakefulness
opens and closes.
This is what it is
to be a human being.
But it evokes in us
the responsibility
to inhabit and create a
personal practice of return.
So that when I shut down,
I know how to open up.
When I am--
One day I can be so sensitive.
You know those days where
if you spilled this water,
I'd be able to catch it
before it reached the ground.
And other days, I'll
spill it on you.
>>LISA: Yes.
OK, so that's normal then.
>>NEPO: That's what
it is to be human.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>NEPO: But how do I return to
being sensitive when I'm numb?
How do I return to being
clear when I'm clouded?
How do I return to resilience
when I'm feeling overwhelmed?
These are all parts that
only the heart can teach us
when it connects us to the
resilience of all other life
and to the resources
of life itself.
So let me say one other
important distinction
here in terms of how
we've been miseducated
through the centuries.
The word "perfect" does
not mean, originally,
without flaws.
The word "perfect"
originally meant thorough.
>>LISA: Really?
>>NEPO: To be thorough.
And in the original King
James version of the Bible,
that was mistranslated.
Because the word "perfect" in
Aramaic meant wholeheartedness.
And it was translated
as perfect.
>>LISA: Was it perfecto in--
>>NEPO: I don't know.
I don't know what
it was in the Latin.
>>LISA: But that's interesting.
>>NEPO: So when we
have been asked--
We have been on a
track of miseducation,
I feel, for 2,000 years
trying to minimize or prune
our humanness so we can be
without flaws, when we have
been asked by Jesus and
every other spiritual teacher
from the beginning of time
to inhabit our humanness
and reveal heaven on
earth through being human,
by being as thorough
as we can be.
Not perfect.
So what does that mean?
That means that
it doesn't matter
how well I tell you I love you.
It doesn't matter
if my voice cracks.
I need water, it's cracking now.
It doesn't matter if I
stumble or I'm awkward.
What matters is that I
do it with a whole heart.
So it's about presence
and not performance.
>>LISA: So you're
a business leader.
You run a major company.
You have to make decisions on
a daily basis that maybe aren't
so popular with
one group but will
help move the company forward.
How do you do and make
these difficult decisions
throughout your day?
You could be a parent
making a difficult decision
with an adolescent, or
any of these things.
Wholeheartedly where
people are upset.
And I'm going after the
perfection thing here.
It's not-- it's
going to be messy.
>>NEPO: There is nothing
as messy and magnificent
as being a human being.
Nothing.
And whether you are a leader
in a business or a gardener
or a mechanic or a parent,
it doesn't-- or a friend
or you're bagging groceries,
it returns the challenge to us
to have the courage to say
what is true when it is true
and to do so kindly.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>NEPO: To do so kindly.
>>LISA: And what about
in a place of crisis?
It was so interesting.
On the way to work today,
I had to get detoured
because of three
separate accidents.
But the accidents
looked very severe.
One whole road was shut down
and the car was on fire.
Three separate detours.
Three separate accidents.
And I really took
time at each accident
to just have compassion
for those people,
whatever they were going
through in that moment.
And it's all very, very
difficult and jarring.
How do you take accidents--
and it couldn't necessarily
be a car, but things that happen
that are very shocking in life
and deal with those
wholeheartedly, Mark?
>>NEPO: Well, I think
part of wholeheartedly
means saying, oh my god, I
don't know what to do with this.
But not deny that
it touches you.
>>LISA: So surrender
is a part of it?
>>NEPO: Well, to accept the
full-- see, I have found that--
and this is the paradox
about the heart.
The heart is so
sensitive that when
we feel things, good things
and difficult things,
we feel, oh my god, I don't
know if I could stand this.
I don't know if I--
and yet, the heart
is the strongest muscle we have.
It is the tuning fork by which
we know the entire universe.
So on the one hand,
how do we trust-- not
lose trust in the magnificent
resource that we have
and learn to be ever
more skillful in how
to deal with that sensitivity?
So often, what happens is
we're in relationships.
And a good, simple example--
and this, I'm sure,
has happened with
couples all over.
This is where my wife has taught
me things through the years.
And we've been
together over 20 years.
But somewhere early on--
five, six, seven years--
she was going through something
difficult, painful, emotional.
And I was feeling her pain.
And I so wanted
to try to help her
that I started to try to offer
solutions and ways to look
at it.
And she stopped and said,
I know you mean well,
but you just don't
want to feel my pain.
And at first I felt
like, I'm here.
And I took a breath and
I said, you're right.
You're right.
And that will
never happen again.
And what she was asking
for is what we all
ask for is honest company.
We can't skip-- see, the mind--
>>LISA: Don't fix it.
>>NEPO: --the will wants to
skip over the tough stuff.
And the fact is, I can't
take her pain away.
And compassion, what does
that word literally mean?
It means to keep
honest company with.
So if you're bleeding,
I can help you.
We can call the doctor.
If you need a Bandaid.
If you need water,
if you're thirsty.
But on all the things
that happen that matter
that can't be seen-- our
self-worth, our connection
to the sacred, our sense of
loss, our sense of worth;
I can't take anything
away from you.
I can only keep you company
and have compassion.
That is, be with you.
And that's what love really is.
That's what intimacy really is.
>>LISA: As we said
earlier about the heart
being such a powerful
thing and you
were talking about relationship.
Relationship was one of
the most challenging things
to figure out.
When you combine two people
and all of their history
and try to make
it work together,
why is it so easily broken?
And as you say, it
builds the muscle.
Yes, it does.
>>NEPO: Because we
are dynamic beings.
That is, we're
constantly growing.
And so in order to grow,
we need to build structures
and identities that we can grow
in the way an egg is incubated.
And then, as we grow, we
need to actually have life.
It has to crack those identities
so we can grow larger.
>>LISA: Open.
>>NEPO: And form
another structure
to help us grow even more.
So one of the
things-- and this has
been-- you know, the different
traditions speak about this,
but every crack is an opening.
Now, of course, it doesn't
feel good to get cracked.
Nobody likes this.
And I'm not advocating it.
It's more like you
don't advocate gravity.
It's a fact.
This is like part of
spiritual physics.
That we are--
There are two ways that
human beings tend to grow.
And we do both.
Often, at the same time.
One is that we willfully
shed, like snakes shed
and crabs shed skin.
And we are broken open.
>>LISA: And go
towards expansion.
>>NEPO: We are broken open.
So for instance in
the Tibetan tradition,
it is believed that
a spiritual warrior--
not a military warrior.
A spiritual warrior,
that is someone
who believes and is committed
to a life of transformation,
always has a crack
in their heart.
Because that is how
the mysteries get in.
>>LISA: And that's
probably what causes
them to be the warrior,
is because they had
that experience of
pain that caused
that experience of growth.
Is that what you're saying?
>>NEPO: Yes.
And it lets everything else in.
So in the Chinese
tradition, there
is a great line in a text called
"The Doctrine of the Mean."
Not mean and in meanness, but
as in the middle way, that
says given sincerity, there
will be enlightenment.
You don't need to be
skillful or great.
>>LISA: Just authentic.
>>NEPO: Just authentic.
So I had been drawn
through the years
to look into where the
word sincere comes from.
And it's very helpful.
In the Western
tradition, sincere
goes back to the
Renaissance, where
we know there were so many
great artists and sculptors
and painters.
So there were also, like
hardware stores today,
there were stone sellers.
And fraudulent
stone sellers would
take a cracked piece of marble
and fill it in with wax,
and polish it, and try to
sell it as a perfect stone.
Sin cerae in Latin
means without wax.
>>LISA: Oh, really?
>>NEPO: So an honest stone
seller didn't hide the flaws.
And pretty soon, it
became understood
that an honest person didn't
hide their humanity, didn't
hide their cracks, their flaws.
So not only they could be
more an honest relationship,
but they let the mysteries in
to touch our and fill our heart.
>>LISA: So
authentically, are you
100% awakened throughout
your whole day?
>>NEPO: Oh, god no.
>>LISA: Right?
How can we possibly be?
>>NEPO: No, there are moments.
>>LISA: About how much
do you get it right?
>>NEPO: Well, even that I
wouldn't say get it right.
I would say that
we go-- we move--
see, rather than thinking
of things as true and false,
I think of things as
partial and whole.
And we move being human
into moments of wholeness,
and then we trip.
The medieval monks,
Christian monks,
when asked how they
practiced their faith
would often say by falling
down and getting up.
I love that.
>>LISA: That will teach you.
Yes.
>>NEPO: I love that.
So we're having a
great conversation
and this is-- I feel like
we're in a real sense
of clarity today.
I can go home and next week
I'll trip over the garbage
and I won't remember
what we talked about.
And I'll have to relearn it.
But that-- it doesn't mean
that I've done anything wrong.
>>LISA: That's great.
Yes.
>>NEPO: That's what we do.
That's why we're here.
>>LISA: Patience and simplicity.
>>NEPO: Patience and simplicity.
And Lao-Tzu was an amazing
teacher from the 6th Century.
And so he said, these
are three things,
as we talked about in the
clip, that he-- the only things
he had to teach.
And simplicity
invites us to return
to being direct about living.
To removing whatever is between
us and what we're experiencing.
>>LISA: Sounds like focus to me.
What's the difference
between simplicity and focus?
>>NEPO: Again, synonyms.
If that-- if focus is a way to
understand that, that's fine.
>>LISA: It seems
more harsh, though.
>>NEPO: Well, simplicity is--
it was Oliver Wendell Holmes who
said, we go through
complication to arrive
at the far side of complexity.
And to arrive at
simplicity there.
So of course, there
are things that
are complex and complicated,
but we're always asked--
and this is where, like, OK.
I was brought up Jewish,
I mentioned earlier.
And brought up like
every tradition,
that they're distinct.
Oh, you're Jewish.
And you're not Catholic.
And you're not this.
And we all honor
these differences.
And then it took suffering
to break me and say,
there's no difference.
Let's get back to what's simple.
We're all here.
We're all in
relation to something
we don't understand
that's bigger than us.
We all suffer.
We're all helping each other.
Boom, simplicity.
Simplicity.
And patience.
Patience.
We all have to develop our
very difficult friendship
with our greatest
ally, patience.
>>LISA: Yes.
Let's talk about that.
>>NEPO: Because I can say
through my cancer journey,
I had to make several
decisions over three years.
Each was crucial to my
being with you here today.
I had to say no
to brain surgery.
I had to say yes to rib surgery.
I had to say yes to chemo.
And then I had to
say no to chemo.
And from the
outside, they looked
like I didn't know
what I was doing.
And that was the only
path to be here today.
And the things that matter
reveal their truths in time.
>>LISA: How did you say
no to the brain surgery?
We kind of passed over
the fact that the tumor
mysteriously shrunk.
>>NEPO: Well, I
had-- I was scheduled
for a craniotomy, which would
have removed that tumor.
And by the way, would have
affected my memory and speech.
Which, for me, would
be like taking away
the knees to a quarterback.
And you know, I might
have had to do that.
And I was also scheduled,
as a follow-up,
to have spinal chemotherapy.
And I insisted-- I
knew that the tumor was
fluctuating on my head.
>>LISA: What do you mean?
>>NEPO: It was getting
bigger and getting smaller.
It was physically changing.
And all of the
doctors I was seeing,
no one would believe me
except my neurosurgeon.
And he was the first
one who saved my life
because he didn't operate.
>>LISA: And you did this
through intuition that you--
>>NEPO: I had a sense
that this was happening.
And I told him.
And everyone else
said, well, that's nice
but tumors don't do that.
And we understand
you're in denial.
And he said, I have done
hundreds of these operations,
but I believe you
and we'll wait.
>>LISA: My goodness.
>>NEPO: And then I
had asked for one more
MRI-- I've had so
many in my life--
to measure what was going on.
And that day, which
was October 15, 1987--
I'll never forget it.
It's an anniversary for me.
I woke up that morning.
I was supposed to have the
MRI at 9:00 in the morning.
I woke up at 5:00 in the morning
and I knew the tumor was gone.
I could feel it.
And until it was
gone, I didn't know
because while I had the
tumor, in an energy way,
it felt like a
tuning fork vibrat--
vibration in my being.
And when I woke up that
morning, it was still.
And we went and had the MRI.
And by this time, I had films.
And I was given a
second set of films.
And I went into the waiting room
and held them up to the light
and it was gone.
>>LISA: Did you
associate anything
to that reduction or removal
or disappearance of that tumor?
Was there a shift that
you made in your being?
>>NEPO: Well, you know,
immense gratitude and humility
and my understanding that I
have no control over anything.
This gets back to the
conversation about the will.
I can participate and be active
in my time here on Earth,
but it's an illusion
that we, as human beings,
have control over any-- the only
thing that we have control over
is our absence or our presence.
>>LISA: Wow.
Absolutely.
That's incredible.
So you live your life in
a way that ebbs and flows
with the universe, but
yet, you still write books,
move forward, you do interviews.
You've been on "Oprah."
And many, many times.
And this is how--
You don't set goals
out into the future
to want to be on "Oprah,"
you just move into it.
>>NEPO: No.
No, not at all, quite honestly.
You know I-- about eight,
nine years out from my cancer
journey I was going
for an annual checkup.
And they're always
nerve-wracking because you
feel fine, but you
think, oh, what if?
And I was fine.
And I was sent
back into my life.
And I was walking out of
the-- through the waiting
room as another woman
was set to go in
and she collapsed
in the waiting room.
And everybody--
there was a Code Red.
And people came to scoop her up.
And they went to
take care of her
and there I was in
the waiting room
after she was gone looking at
the door back out to my life.
But for a hiccup of God,
they could have scooped me up
and you'd be talking
to her today.
So I have always-- I'm
grateful for everything that's
unfolding around my
teaching and my work.
But I know it doesn't
have to be this way.
And I am just--
Another paradox I've written
about in one of my poems
is that there's nowhere
to go and nothing to do.
And accepting this, we can do
everything and go anywhere.
>>LISA: Wow, that is beautiful.
That is absolutely beautiful.
I have this one
last thing I wanted
you to take a look at with
Mark Nepo being interviewed
by Oprah about his book
"7,000 Ways to Listen."
Take a look.
>>OPRAH: Let's talk
about the title
of your latest book,
"7,000 Ways to Listen:
Staying Close to
What is Sacred."
At first it was intimidating
because I thought, oh my god,
am I going to have to learn
7,000 different ways to listen?
I don't have that much time.
>>NEPO: No, there aren't.
>>OPRAH: So it isn't
7,000 different steps,
but there's 7,000
ways to listen.
>>NEPO: Well, it's a metaphor.
>>OPRAH: That title,
it's a metaphor.
>>NEPO: It's a metaphor.
And how that title came to
me is I was-- now a friend,
but when I first met this
amazing linguist from Nigeria,
he was talking to me about all
the living languages on Earth.
And he said, there are
7,000 ways to speak.
And I just-- it was
delightful to meet him.
We'd become friends.
And I went home that
night in the quiet.
And as I was going to sleep and
my wife, Susan, and our dog,
Mira, were breathing next to me,
I had this obvious revelation.
I said, well, if there are
at least 7,000 ways to speak,
there have to be
7,000 ways to listen.
And that gave me a
way in to the book.
>>OPRAH: That's a beautiful,
beautiful, beautiful metaphor.
How do you define
listening, Mark?
>>NEPO: Listening is being, when
we can, as completely present
to whatever is before us
with all of who we are.
With all of who we are.
>>OPRAH: Yeah, that's what
you mean by 7,000 ways.
>>NEPO: Yeah.
And we never know which
way will touch us.
One of the things--
and this, also
a metaphor that I'll
share now, speaks
about spiritual traditions, too.
Because I think we
spend-- we always have,
but we spend too much
time arguing over
the primacy of one
path over another.
When--
>>OPRAH: Who is correct?
Who is correct?
>>NEPO: Yeah.
And when we need every one.
We need every one.
So in nature, in
spring you think
of how it takes thousands
of insects and birds
to pollinate all the
different flowers and plants.
Each one is born
with an inclination
to a particular pollen
that they then bring.
You don't find the bees
telling all the other insects,
we all got to be bees.
>>OPRAH: And this is
the way it's done.
>>NEPO: Right.
And so only when we do
that do we have spring.
And likewise, I feel like
we need every spiritual path
to create the human spring.
So we need to listen for
what calls to each of us.
>>LISA: It's been such
a joy to listen to you
for this particular interview
and just this time-- it's
so expanding.
I could go back and go into
each one of the concepts
that I've learned
about-- perfection
and about compassion.
And I know that you're
also a wonderful poet.
And do you have a favorite
that you could share with us?
>>NEPO: Sure.
Well, thank you.
It's great to be with
you and enter this space.
And you know, I
believe that poetry
is the unexpected
utterance of the soul.
And it's at the
heart of everything,
at the heart of
our conversation.
It's not the way
words are on a page.
>>LISA: It's poetic.
>>NEPO: Yeah.
So yeah, this is a poem of
mine called "Free Fall."
"If you have one hour of
air and many hours to go,
you must breathe slowly.
If you have one arm's length
and many things to care for,
you must give freely.
If you have one chance to
know God, and many doubts,
you must set your heart on fire.
We are blessed.
Each day is a chance.
We have two arms.
Fear wastes air."
>>LISA: Wow.
Oh, chilling.
Beautiful.
Yes.
Wow.
When did you write that?
>>NEPO: I wrote that about a
year after my cancer journey.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yeah, that sums a lot of it up.
That's incred-- thank
you so much for sharing
your journey with us.
And you've given people hope.
And also, those
that maybe have not
gone through the
cancer journey or other
struggles in life, you've
given us ways, tools,
to really look at things
in a different way,
different philosophy.
So thank you--
>>NEPO: Oh, you're welcome.
>>LISA: --so much.
It's just a pleasure
to have you here.
I appreciate it.
>>NEPO: Same here.
>>LISA: Thank you.
And if you would like to watch
the replay of my interview
with Mark Nepo or share
it with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]